---
layout: post
title: "Opinions"
description: "What does it take to form an opinion and how do you go about handling the conflicts arising because of opinions"
category: management
tags: [management, decision making]
imagefeature: cover18.png
comments: true
share: true
---

We all have opinions on different topics, from the best pizza place in town to the political party to vote for in the next election. More often than not these opinions are innocuous and don't impact anything critical. However, there are times when opinions can have an impact on other individuals, projects, or an organization.

In such cases, a certain level of rigor is expected from an individual before they form an opinion. Here’s my checklist that I go through when forming opinions on important topics:

* Do you know if the subject under discussion is in your [circle of competence](https://fs.blog/2013/12/circle-of-competence/) or outside of it?
* Is the opinion intuition-based or fact-based? Is it coming from [System 1](https://fs.blog/2014/07/daniel-kahneman-the-two-systems/) (intuitive and fast) or System 2 (thoughtful and slow)?
* If it is intuition-based, can you identify the source of intuition?
* Is this intuition formed on initial impression in a different area ([halo effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halo_effect))?
* If it is fact-based, do you have the data to support it?
* Can this data be biased? Are you only looking at supporting data ([confirmation bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias))?
* Is there data that contradicts your opinion? What makes it unconvincing?
* What are the arguments against your opinion? Can you describe the arguments against your opinion better than your opponent?
* Can you publicly put your opinion without fear of backlash?
* How can you stress test your opinion?

Going through such a checklist helps you to reduce some of the biases and improves the quality of your decisions. There will still be times when a decision has to be made and you have conflicting opinions with others. Hence it is very important to have a __conflict resolution framework__. I use the following checklist when I have conflicting opinions on a topic:

* __Understand what is at stake__: this will determine how far you want to push the discussion. This is extremely important because discussions provide diminishing returns after a certain point. Is it a decision about a comment in the code? Or about your next big investment?
* __Have the right mindset__: because of cognitive biases you will tend to overestimate the pros of your opinion and underestimate its cons. Acknowledge that you may have blind spots that other people might be seeing and the sole purpose of the discussion is to find the right answer, not to prove yourself right.
* __Listen__: explain the other person their point of view and demonstrate sincerely that you understand it. Ask them to do the same. This will ensure that both sides understand each other's point of view.
* __Thoughtful disagreement__: after understanding different points of view, evaluate the opinions based on their pros and cons and try to reach an agreement. If that doesn’t work:
    * __Option 1__: Try to find a common ground that you agree with and build up from there until you bridge the differences.
    * __Option 2__: Try to find the root cause of disagreement and work to resolve that. A lot of times disagreement is arising because of a different underlying cause.
    * __Option 3__: Find a neutral mediator who is highly skilled on the topic. Both sides should agree to accept their solution regardless of whatever it might be.

When the opinions are subjective, it is very hard to reach a conclusion. Sometimes we just have to __agree to disagree__. The disagreements provide a little value after a certain point and they tend to become personal. However, if you disagree with a decision, make sure that you [disagree and commit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disagree_and_commit).
